---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: post
title: Creating a GLM for SOE Data
date: 2019-12-05
---
I thought it might be useful to have a little tutorial about how the GLM maps are created for the SOE data. I am basing this off the current method in Tony's scripts.

## Processing Scripts
The general process of creating $$\beta$$-maps for each word requires regressingn out words, nuissance regressors and motion.

# Building Word and Nuissance Regressors
The first step is to make 1d regressor files to feed into afni.Tony has a script, `regressors.py` which which has several functions:

 * build_large_file - converts psychopy table into python variable with proper format
 * demean_and_write - groups reaction time into 6 groups (2 per session), and converts reaction times into z-scores
 * word_length   - creates word-length as a nuisance regressor
 * word_stim_time   - creates 1d arrays for target word and all other words
 * copy_anat      - uses `3dcopy` to copy anatomy files (not sure why?)

At the end of all this work, we have generated the files

# Building Motion Regressors

The script `3dDcon_Preparation.py` (which requires python 2) generates the motion regressors. This script has two functions:
 * afni_to_nifti - this runs the afni command `3dAFNItoNIFTI` where all the pre-processed scans in the SOE320 projects folder are converted to nifti files into Tony's directory 
 * prepare_motion_censor_regressor - this takes the motion files from the pre-processed directory. The first three steps use the function `1d_tool.py` and this function performs the following tasks:
   
   | De-meaned motion parameters | Removes the mean from 1d files |
   | Motion parameter derivatives | Creates .1d derivative file |
   | Create censor file | Takes 1d file and creates a censor 1d file |
   | Combine censor results | Uses `1deval` to set motion outlier as 0.1 (1-step(a - 0.1)) |
   | Combine multiple censor files | Uses `1deval` to combine censor files using $$a*b$$ | 

# 3dDeconvolve Script

Tony then has a script for running 3d deconvolve (`3dDcon_SOE_Doug.py`) which has the following functions:
 * extract_words - creates sorted list of words based on file names in patient directory
 * separate_words - creates several subgroups of words (number of groups fed in as argument)
 * Set_the_deconvolve_line - This is used to create the design matrix which is fed into the next step. The regressors included here are:

    | Censor Regressor | Motion censor |
    | Target word regressor | This is the time point for the word of interest (6 time points) |
    | All other words | This is a regressor for AOW |
    | Word length regressor | This is a regressor for visual information |
    | Response Time regressor | This is the reaction time z-score. This is thought to correlate with overall word difficulty. **Note**: *This is split into 6 different groups, so this is really 6 different regressors* |
    | Motion demean | Not really sure? |
    | Motion derivitive | Not sure how generated |

   * The other key points of this line are that 'SPMG1' is used as the HRF, and the output directory is called GLM_wordmaps. At the end of this script, the line which is created from this command is too long to include below, but the output of this function is a file called `X.xmat.1d` which is fed into the next function

 * Set_the_Remlfit_line - This takes in the design matrix, the input, and a brain mask. The output of this command will look something like:

```
$ 3dREMLfit -matrix .../X.xmat.1D 
   -input " " 
   -mask .../SOE_123.mask.nii.gz 
   -fout -rout -tout -Rbuck /jtong/SOE/GLM_wordmaps/Doug_method/123/stats.nii.gz 
   -verb
```

# Running the Script
Finally, we can now process a patient. We can use Tony's script `build_torque_Doug.py` which creates and submits a job to the cluster. The final command is:

```
python3 build_torque_Doug.py SOE_123
```
# Thoughts / Q's
* Why is SMPG1 used instead of a multiple basis functions (seems more common in the literature)?
* How/Why to use -censor_prev_TR option in 1d_tool.py (motion censor script)
